<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE concept
  PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Concept//EN" "concept.dtd">
<concept xml:lang="en-us" id="concept2677">
	<title>Hello Couchbase example</title>
	<conbody>

        <p>Now that you added the SDK dependency to your project, you can proceed and implement the classic "Hello World" example. Some important aspects are also covered along the way that will help you later.</p>

        <p>The first thing you need to do is connect to the cluster:</p>

        <codeblock outputclass="language-java">Cluster cluster = CouchbaseCluster.create();</codeblock>

        <p>With no other arguments provided, this will logically bind it to a cluster where at least
			one node is reachable on <codeph>localhost</codeph>. This is a reasonable default to get
			started, but you can also pass in one or more seed nodes like this:</p>

        <codeblock outputclass="language-java">Cluster cluster = CouchbaseCluster.create("192.168.56.101", "192.168.56.102");</codeblock>

        <p>You do not need to pass in all nodes of the cluster, just a few seed nodes so that the client is able to establish initial contact. The actual process of connecting to a bucket (that is, opening sockets and everything related) happens when you call the <codeph>openBucket</codeph> method:</p>

        <codeblock outputclass="language-java"><![CDATA[Bucket bucket = cluster.openBucket();]]></codeblock>

        <p>This will connect to the <codeph>default</codeph> bucket and return a <codeph>Bucket</codeph>.</p>

        <p>At the end of your code you need to shut down the client to free all resources (sockets, threads, and so on). If you don't shut it down, your app keeps running because some threads are required to be non-daemon threads. The following code shuts down the client:</p>

        <codeblock outputclass="language-java">cluster.disconnect();</codeblock>

        <p>This disconnects all buckets and frees associated ressources.</p>

        <p>You now have a reference to the <codeph>Bucket</codeph>, so you can begin working with it. The SDK comes with built-in handling for JSON documents, which you can use right away. First, create a <codeph>JsonObject</codeph>, which contains information for a user.</p>

<codeblock outputclass="language-java">JsonObject user = JsonObject.empty()
    .put("firstname", "Walter")
    .put("lastname", "White")
    .put("job", "chemistry teacher")
    .put("age", 50);</codeblock>

        <p>A <codeph>JsonObject</codeph> works very much like a <codeph>Map</codeph>, but it is designed to only let you insert values that can be stored as valid JSON (including nested objects and arrays). The resulting document looks like this:</p>

<codeblock outputclass="language-json">{
    "firstname":"Walter",
    "job":"chemistry teacher",
    "age":50,
    "lastname":"White"
}</codeblock>

        <p>To store the document, you can use the <codeph>upsert</codeph> method on the <codeph>bucket</codeph>. Because a document on the server has more properties than just the content, you need to give it at least a unique document ID (for example, <codeph>walter</codeph>). The container for all this information is called a <codeph>Document</codeph> and because you are dealing with JSON you need to create a <codeph>JsonDocument</codeph>:</p>

<codeblock outputclass="language-java"><![CDATA[JsonDocument doc = JsonDocument.create("walter", user);
JsonDocument response = bucket.upsert(doc);]]></codeblock>

        <p>The <codeph>Document</codeph> is automatically converted into JSON and stored on the cluster. If the document (identified by its unique ID) already exists, it is replaced.</p>

        <p>If you replace <codeph>upsert</codeph> with <codeph>insert</codeph> and try to insert the same document twice (with the same ID), you see the following:</p>

<codeblock outputclass="language-java"><![CDATA[Exception in thread "main" com.couchbase.client.java.error.DocumentAlreadyExistsException
    at com.couchbase.client.java.CouchbaseAsyncBucket$12.call(CouchbaseAsyncBucket.java:284)
    at com.couchbase.client.java.CouchbaseAsyncBucket$12.call(CouchbaseAsyncBucket.java:280)
    at rx.internal.operators.OperatorMap$1.onNext(OperatorMap.java:54)
    at rx.subjects.SubjectSubscriptionManager$SubjectObserver.onNext(SubjectSubscriptionManager.java:224)
    at rx.subjects.AsyncSubject.onCompleted(AsyncSubject.java:96)
    at com.couchbase.client.core.ResponseHandler.onEvent(ResponseHandler.java:98)
    at com.couchbase.client.core.ResponseHandler.onEvent(ResponseHandler.java:43)
    at com.couchbase.client.deps.com.lmax.disruptor.BatchEventProcessor.run(BatchEventProcessor.java:128)
    at java.util.concurrent.ThreadPoolExecutor.runWorker(ThreadPoolExecutor.java:1142)
    at java.util.concurrent.ThreadPoolExecutor$Worker.run(ThreadPoolExecutor.java:617)
    at com.couchbase.client.deps.io.netty.util.concurrent.DefaultThreadFactory$DefaultRunnableDecorator.run(DefaultThreadFactory.java:137)
    at java.lang.Thread.run(Thread.java:745)]]></codeblock>

        <p>This provides an important clue:</p>

        <ul>
            <li><codeph>insert</codeph>, unlike <codeph>upsert</codeph> fails if the document already exists on the server (very much like the SQL <codeph>INSERT</codeph>
              statement).</li>
        </ul>

        <p>Not surprisingly, you can also retrieve a <codeph>Document</codeph> from the database. You do this by providing its ID:</p>

<codeblock outputclass="language-java"><![CDATA[JsonDocument walter = bucket.get("walter");
System.out.println("Found: " + walter);]]></codeblock>

        <p>This prints:</p>

<codeblock outputclass="language-java"><![CDATA[Found: JsonDocument{id='walter', cas=16976883046781, expiry=0, content={"firstname":"Walter","job":"chemistry teacher","age":50,"lastname":"White"}}]]></codeblock>

        <p>If you want to print only the age, you can reach into the content (much like you would access a `Map`):</p>

        <codeblock outputclass="language-java"><![CDATA[System.out.println("Age: " + walter.content().getInt("age"));]]></codeblock>

        <p>Now that you are an expert in storing and retreiving documents, you can combine both commands to implement something that is needed very often: loading a document, modifying its content and eventually storing the modified document.</p>

        <p>First, here is one of the synchronous ways to do it:</p>

<codeblock outputclass="language-java"><![CDATA[JsonDocument loaded = bucket.get("walter");
if (loaded == null) {
    System.err.println("Document not found!");
} else {
    loaded.content().put("age", 52);
    JsonDocument updated = bucket.replace(loaded);
    System.out.println("Updated: " + updated.id());
}]]></codeblock>


        <p>The code uses the <codeph>get</codeph> method to load the <codeph>Document</codeph> and
            waits until it arrives from the server (and returns <codeph>null</codeph> as the default
            value if it does not exist). If it is not null, the content is modified and the document is
            stored again through the <codeph>replace</codeph> method. You can think of
                <codeph>replace</codeph> as the opposite of <codeph>insert</codeph>—if the document does
            not already exist, the call fails.</p>

        <p>The code shown above is completely synchronous, which means that your main thread will wait all the time until a response comes back from the server. It waits for network IO to happen while instead it could perform valuable work. This is where the whole idea of asynchronous and parallel computation gets interesting. Instead of waiting and "pulling" the data out of the SDK, you can just keep going forward in your application flow and let the SDK notify you once it's done with work.</p>

        <p><codeph>Observable</codeph>s provide a large range of methods and functionality to create, combine and transform asynchronous workflows and make them look synchronous (while they aren't). This is important, because other approaches quickly get you into "callback hell" and are complicated dealing with futures, especially if you want to chain more than one asynchronous operation together.</p>

        <p>Here is the very same example, but completely non-blocking (note that you want to keep your main thread alive with a <codeph>Thread.sleep()</codeph> for now or use <codeph>CountDownLatch</codeph>):</p>

<codeblock outputclass="language-java"><![CDATA[bucket
    .async()
    .get("walter")
    .flatMap(new Func1<JsonDocument, Observable<JsonDocument>>() {
        @Override
        public Observable<JsonDocument> call(final JsonDocument loaded) {
            loaded.content().put("age", 52);
            return bucket.async().replace(loaded);
        }
    })
    .subscribe(new Action1<JsonDocument>() {
        @Override
        public void call(final JsonDocument updated) {
            System.out.println("Updated: " + updated.id());
        }
    });]]></codeblock>
        
        <p>Note how you can get access to the underlying asynchronous interfaces by using the <codeph>async()</codeph> method on the bucket.</p>

        <p>Without going too much in-depth about how <codeph>Observables</codeph> work, it is not
            too hard to guess what is happening. The document is loaded through the
                <codeph>get</codeph> method and after it is done, the <codeph>flatMap</codeph> method is
            executed. This method changes the content and calls the <codeph>replace</codeph> method.
            After the replace is done, the <codeph>Subscriber</codeph> is called and the line is
            printed. You do not need to check for <codeph>null</codeph> here because the whole chain is
            just not executed if the document is not found in the first place.</p>

        <p>The style shown above is Java6/7 with anonymous classes. If you are one of the happy ones to already use Java 8, you can replace the same code with lambdas to make it much nicer and succinct:</p>

<codeblock outputclass="language-java"><![CDATA[bucket
    .async()
    .get("walter")
    .flatMap(loaded -> {
        loaded.content().put("age", 52);
        return bucket.async().replace(loaded);
    })
    .subscribe(updated -> System.out.println("Updated: " + updated.id()));]]></codeblock>

        <p>Because this flow is asynchronous, every "callback" is run in a specific thread,
            different from your "main" one. Since this one-off example is different from long-running
            server applications (which are not shut down after one operation), it is a good idea to
            synchronize and wait after the last operation is finished.</p>

        <p>A naive way is to add a <codeph>Thread.sleep(1000)</codeph> after the last call to keep the current thread alive for a second and hope that the operation is done:</p>

<codeblock outputclass="language-java"><![CDATA[bucket
    .async()
    .get("walter")
    .flatMap(loaded -> {
        loaded.content().put("age", 52);
        return bucket.replace(loaded);
    })
    .subscribe(updated -> System.out.println("Updated: " + updated.id()));

Thread.sleep(1000);]]></codeblock>

        <p>Usually it takes a shorter amount of time, so you are just wasting time. And in the
            unlikely case that it takes longer, it doesn't work properly. So a much better way is the
            use of a <codeph>CountDownLatch</codeph>, which ships with the JDK. One thread counts it
            down and the other waits until its counted down:</p>

<codeblock outputclass="language-java"><![CDATA[final CountDownLatch latch = new CountDownLatch(1);
bucket
    .async()
    .get("walter")
    .flatMap(loaded -> {
        loaded.content().put("age", 52);
        return bucket.replace(loaded);
    })
    .subscribe(updated -> {
        System.out.println("Updated: " + updated.id());
        latch.countDown();
    });

latch.await();]]></codeblock>

        <p>This is also the preferred way on how to deal with asynchronous computation in unit tests and other scenarios where tight control between threads is needed.</p>

        <p>Congratulations, you've completed your first steps towards Couchbase mastery! At this
            point, you can either proceed with the complete tutorial application or browse through the
            rest of the documentation as you see fit.</p>
	</conbody>
</concept>
